README.md, before:

# 🧠 Research Paper - Effect of Behavioural Biases on Investor's Decision Making

<div align="center">

![Research Type](https://img.shields.io/badge/Research-Independent%20Study-blue?style=for-the-badge)
![Academic Year](https://img.shields.io/badge/Year-2022--2023-orange?style=for-the-badge)

### *Understanding the Psychology Behind Investment Decisions in Indian Securities Market*

📊 92 Respondents | 💡 7 Behavioral Biases

---

~ Independent Research by Saakshi Dedhia 

[📄 View Full Paper](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1rlRXjTqok3UZdrDEgnYzzftjcDBT62cE/view) 

</div>

---

## 🌟 Why This Research Matters

> **Did you know?** 63% of investors get more hurt by losses than they feel happy about equivalent gains. This is just one of many psychological biases affecting millions of investment decisions daily.

In the rapidly evolving Indian securities market, understanding **why** investors make certain decisions is as important as understanding **what** they invest in. This research unveils the hidden psychological factors that drive investment behavior.

### 🎯 Research Impact
- ✅ First comprehensive study on behavioral biases among young Indian investors
- ✅ Practical framework for improving investment decision-making
- ✅ Evidence-based recommendations for financial advisors
- ✅ Bridge between academic theory and real-world investing

---

## 📖 Table of Contents

- [🔍 Abstract](#-abstract)
- [🧪 The 7 Behavioral Biases](#-the-7-behavioral-biases-examined)
- [📊 Research Methodology](#-research-methodology)
- [💡 Key Findings](#-key-research-findings)
- [🎯 Recommendations](#-recommendations)
- [📈 Visual Insights](#-visual-insights)
- [🚀 Future Research](#-future-research-directions)
- [📚 How to Use This Research](#-how-to-use-this-research)

---

## 🔍 Abstract

</div>

This groundbreaking study examines how **psychological biases** shape investment decisions among individual investors in India. Through a comprehensive survey of **92 respondents**, we uncovered fascinating patterns in investor behavior.

### 🎯 Core Research Questions
1. How do behavioral biases impact investment decisions?
2. What role does financial literacy play in mitigating these biases?
3. How do demographic factors influence investor psychology?

### 🏆 Major Discoveries
| Discovery | Impact |
|-----------|--------|
| 🎯 **Familiarity Bias** | Most prevalent - investors prefer known companies |
| 💔 **Loss Aversion** | 63% feel losses more strongly than equivalent gains |
| 📚 **Financial Literacy** | Acts as a protective shield against biases |
| 👥 **Demographics** | Age, gender, education significantly influence bias susceptibility |

---

## 🧪 The 7 Behavioral Biases Examined

<details open>
<summary><h3>1. 🏢 Familiarity Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
The tendency to invest in companies you know, even when better opportunities exist elsewhere.

**Real Example:**  
Preferring Tata or Reliance stocks simply because they're household names, ignoring potentially better performers.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴🔴⚪ High  
**Prevalence:** 42.4% neutral, 30.4% actively experience it

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>2. 📉 Loss Aversion Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Feeling the pain of losses more intensely than the pleasure of equivalent gains.

**The Math:**  
- Losing ₹100 feels worse than gaining ₹100 feels good
- Leads to overly conservative investment strategies

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴🔴🔴 Very High  
**Prevalence:** 63% of respondents experience this

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>3. 🎯 Disposition Effect</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Selling winners too early and holding losers too long.

**Why it happens:**  
- Hope that losing investments will recover
- Regret about not maximizing gains

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>4. 💰 Mental Accounting Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Treating money differently based on where it came from.

**Example:**  
Treating salary income conservatively but gambling with bonus money.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium  
**Prevalence:** 42.4% prone to this bias

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>5. 😰 Regret Aversion Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Avoiding decisions that might lead to regret, even good opportunities.

**Result:**  
Missed investment opportunities and lower returns.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>6. 📝 Experiential Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Over-relying on personal past experiences rather than objective data.

**The Problem:**  
Past performance doesn't guarantee future results.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>7. 🐑 Herding Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Following the crowd rather than conducting independent analysis.

**Warning Sign:**  
"Everyone is investing in this stock, so I should too!"

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴🔴⚪ High  
**Danger:** Can create market bubbles

</details>

---

## 📊 Research Methodology

### 🎯 Sample Profile

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%">

#### 👥 Demographics
- **Total Respondents:** 92
- **Age Group:** 81.5% (18-25 years)
- **Gender:** 55.4% Female, 44.6% Male
- **Location:** 87% Mumbai, 7.6% Thane
- **Occupation:** 72.8% Students

</td>
<td width="50%">

#### 💼 Investment Profile
- **Risk Appetite:** 66.3% Risk-Seeking
- **Investment Horizon:** 60% Long-term
- **Research Approach:** 75% Personal Research
- **Investment Rate:** 29.3% invest 20-30% income

</td>
</tr>
</table>

### 🔬 Research Design

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[📋 Survey Design] --> B[🌐 Data Collection]
    B --> C[📊 Statistical Analysis]
    C --> D[💡 Insights]
    D --> E[🎯 Recommendations]
```

**Tools Used:**
- 📝 Google Forms - Data Collection
- 📊 Microsoft Excel - Statistical Analysis
- 📈 Spearman's Rank Correlation - Relationship Testing
- 📉 Descriptive Statistics - Pattern Analysis

---

## 💡 Key Research Findings

### 🎯 Finding #1: Behavioral Biases Are Real & Powerful

<div align="center">

| Bias Type | Prevalence | Impact on Returns |
|-----------|------------|-------------------|
| 🎯 Familiarity | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⚪ | Moderate |
| 💔 Loss Aversion | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ | High |
| 🐑 Herding | ⭐⭐⭐⚪⚪ | Variable |
| 💰 Mental Accounting | ⭐⭐⭐⚪⚪ | Moderate |

</div>

### 📚 Finding #2: Financial Literacy is Your Shield

> **Key Insight:** Investors with higher financial literacy are significantly less prone to behavioral biases and make more informed decisions.

**Financial Literacy Breakdown:**
- ✅ High awareness of basic financial terms
- ✅ Positive correlation with better investment outcomes
- ✅ Reduces impact of emotional decision-making

### 👥 Finding #3: Demographics Matter

| Factor | Impact on Biases |
|--------|------------------|
| **Age** | Younger investors more prone to herding & overconfidence |
| **Gender** | Women slightly more risk-averse on average |
| **Education** | Higher education correlates with fewer biases |
| **Experience** | More experience = better bias management |

### 📈 Finding #4: Investment Behavior Patterns

<div>

**Top 3 Information Sources:**
1. 🔍 Personal Research (75%)
2. 🌐 Internet (55.4%)
3. 👥 Friends & Relatives (54.3%)

</div>

---

## 🎯 Recommendations

### 💼 For Individual Investors

<table>
<tr>
<td width="33%">

#### 📚 Educate Yourself
- Take financial literacy courses
- Read investment books
- Follow market analysis
- Understand risk-return tradeoffs

</td>
<td width="33%">

#### 🧠 Recognize Your Biases
- Self-assess regularly
- Keep investment journal
- Track emotional decisions
- Review past mistakes

</td>
<td width="33%">

#### 👨‍💼 Seek Professional Help
- Consult financial advisors
- Use robo-advisors
- Join investment communities
- Attend workshops

</td>
</tr>
</table>

### 🏢 For Financial Professionals

| Action | Benefit |
|--------|---------|
| 🎓 **Educate Clients** | Improved decision-making |
| 🛡️ **Design Bias-Aware Strategies** | Better portfolio performance |
| 📊 **Use Behavioral Analytics** | Personalized advice |
| 🤝 **Build Trust** | Long-term relationships |

### 🏛️ For Policymakers

- 📖 Promote financial literacy programs
- 🎯 Implement investor protection measures
- 📊 Encourage transparent reporting
- 🔍 Monitor market behavior patterns

---

## 📈 Visual Insights

### Investment Decision Framework

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         INVESTMENT DECISION PROCESS             │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                 │
│  1. 🎯 Define Financial Goals                   │
│     ↓                                           │
│  2. 📚 Gain Market Knowledge                    │
│     ↓                                           │
│  3. 🔍 Research Investment Options              │
│     ↓                                           │
│  4. ⚠️  Recognize Behavioral Biases             │
│     ↓                                           │
│  5. 💡 Make Informed Decision                   │
│     ↓                                           │
│  6. 📊 Monitor & Adjust                         │
│                                                 │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## 🔬 Research Validation

### ✅ Hypothesis Testing Results

#### Hypothesis 1: Behavioral Biases Impact Investment Decisions

```
H₀: No significant relationship exists
H₁: Significant positive relationship exists

Result: ✅ H₀ REJECTED
Conclusion: Behavioral biases DO significantly impact decisions
```

#### Hypothesis 2: Financial Literacy Influences Investment Decisions

```
H₀: Financial literacy has no significant influence
H₁: Financial literacy has significant favorable influence

Result: ✅ H₀ REJECTED
Conclusion: Financial literacy DOES significantly influence decisions
```

## 📊 Key Statistics at a Glance

<div align="center">

| Metric | Value | Insight |
|--------|-------|---------|
| 📝 Sample Size | 92 respondents | Representative young investor base |
| 🎯 Risk Seekers | 66.3% | Majority prefer higher returns |
| 📚 Personal Researchers | 75% | High self-reliance in decisions |
| 💔 Loss Aversion | 63% | Majority emotionally impacted by losses |
| 🏢 Familiarity Bias | 72.8% | High preference for known brands |
| 📈 Long-term Focus | 60% | Patient investment approach |
| 🎓 High Financial Literacy | 70%+ | Good awareness of financial terms |

</div>

---

## ⚠️ Research Limitations

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%">

### 🌍 Scope Limitations
- Geographic concentration (Mumbai/Thane)
- Small sample size (92 respondents)
- Cross-sectional study design
- Limited to individual investors

</td>
<td width="50%">

### 📊 Methodological Considerations
- Self-reported data
- Potential response bias
- Limited age diversity
- Student-heavy sample

</td>
</tr>
</table>

---

## 🤝 Contributing

This research opens doors for further exploration. If you're interested in:
- 🔬 Extending this research
- 📊 Collaborating on related studies
- 💡 Sharing insights from your own work
- 🎓 Using this as foundation for advanced research

Feel free to reach out or build upon these findings!

---

## 📜 Citation

If you use this research, please cite as:

```bibtex
@thesis{dedhia2023behavioral,
  author = {Dedhia, Saakshi},
  title = {Effect of Behavioural Biases on Investor's Decision Making},
  school = {Mithibai College (Autonomous)},
  year = {2023},
  type = {Bachelor's Thesis},
  department = {Department of Economics},
  supervisor = {Uttekar, Gorkhnath}
}
```


</div>

---

<div align="center">

### ⭐ Found this research helpful? Share it with others interested in behavioral finance!

**Keywords:** `Behavioral Finance` `Investment Psychology` `Financial Literacy` `Indian Securities Market` `Investor Behavior` `Cognitive Biases` `Decision Making`

---

*Last Updated: 2023 | Academic Year 2022-2023*

</div>

Commit message:

Revise citation for thesis on behavioral biases
Updated citation format for the research thesis.

README.md, after:

# 🧠 Research Paper - Effect of Behavioural Biases on Investor's Decision Making

<div align="center">

![Research Type](https://img.shields.io/badge/Research-Independent%20Study-blue?style=for-the-badge)
![Academic Year](https://img.shields.io/badge/Year-2022--2023-orange?style=for-the-badge)

### *Understanding the Psychology Behind Investment Decisions in Indian Securities Market*

📊 92 Respondents | 💡 7 Behavioral Biases

---

~ Independent Research by Saakshi Dedhia 

[📄 View Full Paper](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1rlRXjTqok3UZdrDEgnYzzftjcDBT62cE/view) 

</div>

---

## 🌟 Why This Research Matters

> **Did you know?** 63% of investors get more hurt by losses than they feel happy about equivalent gains. This is just one of many psychological biases affecting millions of investment decisions daily.

In the rapidly evolving Indian securities market, understanding **why** investors make certain decisions is as important as understanding **what** they invest in. This research unveils the hidden psychological factors that drive investment behavior.

### 🎯 Research Impact
- ✅ First comprehensive study on behavioral biases among young Indian investors
- ✅ Practical framework for improving investment decision-making
- ✅ Evidence-based recommendations for financial advisors
- ✅ Bridge between academic theory and real-world investing

---

## 📖 Table of Contents

- [🔍 Abstract](#-abstract)
- [🧪 The 7 Behavioral Biases](#-the-7-behavioral-biases-examined)
- [📊 Research Methodology](#-research-methodology)
- [💡 Key Findings](#-key-research-findings)
- [🎯 Recommendations](#-recommendations)
- [📈 Visual Insights](#-visual-insights)
- [🚀 Future Research](#-future-research-directions)
- [📚 How to Use This Research](#-how-to-use-this-research)

---

## 🔍 Abstract

</div>

This groundbreaking study examines how **psychological biases** shape investment decisions among individual investors in India. Through a comprehensive survey of **92 respondents**, we uncovered fascinating patterns in investor behavior.

### 🎯 Core Research Questions
1. How do behavioral biases impact investment decisions?
2. What role does financial literacy play in mitigating these biases?
3. How do demographic factors influence investor psychology?

### 🏆 Major Discoveries
| Discovery | Impact |
|-----------|--------|
| 🎯 **Familiarity Bias** | Most prevalent - investors prefer known companies |
| 💔 **Loss Aversion** | 63% feel losses more strongly than equivalent gains |
| 📚 **Financial Literacy** | Acts as a protective shield against biases |
| 👥 **Demographics** | Age, gender, education significantly influence bias susceptibility |

---

## 🧪 The 7 Behavioral Biases Examined

<details open>
<summary><h3>1. 🏢 Familiarity Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
The tendency to invest in companies you know, even when better opportunities exist elsewhere.

**Real Example:**  
Preferring Tata or Reliance stocks simply because they're household names, ignoring potentially better performers.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴🔴⚪ High  
**Prevalence:** 42.4% neutral, 30.4% actively experience it

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>2. 📉 Loss Aversion Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Feeling the pain of losses more intensely than the pleasure of equivalent gains.

**The Math:**  
- Losing ₹100 feels worse than gaining ₹100 feels good
- Leads to overly conservative investment strategies

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴🔴🔴 Very High  
**Prevalence:** 63% of respondents experience this

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>3. 🎯 Disposition Effect</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Selling winners too early and holding losers too long.

**Why it happens:**  
- Hope that losing investments will recover
- Regret about not maximizing gains

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>4. 💰 Mental Accounting Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Treating money differently based on where it came from.

**Example:**  
Treating salary income conservatively but gambling with bonus money.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium  
**Prevalence:** 42.4% prone to this bias

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>5. 😰 Regret Aversion Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Avoiding decisions that might lead to regret, even good opportunities.

**Result:**  
Missed investment opportunities and lower returns.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>6. 📝 Experiential Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Over-relying on personal past experiences rather than objective data.

**The Problem:**  
Past performance doesn't guarantee future results.

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴⚪⚪ Medium

</details>

<details>
<summary><h3>7. 🐑 Herding Bias</h3></summary>

**What is it?**  
Following the crowd rather than conducting independent analysis.

**Warning Sign:**  
"Everyone is investing in this stock, so I should too!"

**Impact Level:** 🔴🔴🔴🔴⚪ High  
**Danger:** Can create market bubbles

</details>

---

## 📊 Research Methodology

### 🎯 Sample Profile

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%">

#### 👥 Demographics
- **Total Respondents:** 92
- **Age Group:** 81.5% (18-25 years)
- **Gender:** 55.4% Female, 44.6% Male
- **Location:** 87% Mumbai, 7.6% Thane
- **Occupation:** 72.8% Students

</td>
<td width="50%">

#### 💼 Investment Profile
- **Risk Appetite:** 66.3% Risk-Seeking
- **Investment Horizon:** 60% Long-term
- **Research Approach:** 75% Personal Research
- **Investment Rate:** 29.3% invest 20-30% income

</td>
</tr>
</table>

### 🔬 Research Design

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[📋 Survey Design] --> B[🌐 Data Collection]
    B --> C[📊 Statistical Analysis]
    C --> D[💡 Insights]
    D --> E[🎯 Recommendations]
```

**Tools Used:**
- 📝 Google Forms - Data Collection
- 📊 Microsoft Excel - Statistical Analysis
- 📈 Spearman's Rank Correlation - Relationship Testing
- 📉 Descriptive Statistics - Pattern Analysis

---

## 💡 Key Research Findings

### 🎯 Finding #1: Behavioral Biases Are Real & Powerful

<div align="center">

| Bias Type | Prevalence | Impact on Returns |
|-----------|------------|-------------------|
| 🎯 Familiarity | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⚪ | Moderate |
| 💔 Loss Aversion | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ | High |
| 🐑 Herding | ⭐⭐⭐⚪⚪ | Variable |
| 💰 Mental Accounting | ⭐⭐⭐⚪⚪ | Moderate |

</div>

### 📚 Finding #2: Financial Literacy is Your Shield

> **Key Insight:** Investors with higher financial literacy are significantly less prone to behavioral biases and make more informed decisions.

**Financial Literacy Breakdown:**
- ✅ High awareness of basic financial terms
- ✅ Positive correlation with better investment outcomes
- ✅ Reduces impact of emotional decision-making

### 👥 Finding #3: Demographics Matter

| Factor | Impact on Biases |
|--------|------------------|
| **Age** | Younger investors more prone to herding & overconfidence |
| **Gender** | Women slightly more risk-averse on average |
| **Education** | Higher education correlates with fewer biases |
| **Experience** | More experience = better bias management |

### 📈 Finding #4: Investment Behavior Patterns

<div>

**Top 3 Information Sources:**
1. 🔍 Personal Research (75%)
2. 🌐 Internet (55.4%)
3. 👥 Friends & Relatives (54.3%)

</div>

---

## 🎯 Recommendations

### 💼 For Individual Investors

<table>
<tr>
<td width="33%">

#### 📚 Educate Yourself
- Take financial literacy courses
- Read investment books
- Follow market analysis
- Understand risk-return tradeoffs

</td>
<td width="33%">

#### 🧠 Recognize Your Biases
- Self-assess regularly
- Keep investment journal
- Track emotional decisions
- Review past mistakes

</td>
<td width="33%">

#### 👨‍💼 Seek Professional Help
- Consult financial advisors
- Use robo-advisors
- Join investment communities
- Attend workshops

</td>
</tr>
</table>

### 🏢 For Financial Professionals

| Action | Benefit |
|--------|---------|
| 🎓 **Educate Clients** | Improved decision-making |
| 🛡️ **Design Bias-Aware Strategies** | Better portfolio performance |
| 📊 **Use Behavioral Analytics** | Personalized advice |
| 🤝 **Build Trust** | Long-term relationships |

### 🏛️ For Policymakers

- 📖 Promote financial literacy programs
- 🎯 Implement investor protection measures
- 📊 Encourage transparent reporting
- 🔍 Monitor market behavior patterns

---

## 📈 Visual Insights

### Investment Decision Framework

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         INVESTMENT DECISION PROCESS             │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                 │
│  1. 🎯 Define Financial Goals                   │
│     ↓                                           │
│  2. 📚 Gain Market Knowledge                    │
│     ↓                                           │
│  3. 🔍 Research Investment Options              │
│     ↓                                           │
│  4. ⚠️  Recognize Behavioral Biases             │
│     ↓                                           │
│  5. 💡 Make Informed Decision                   │
│     ↓                                           │
│  6. 📊 Monitor & Adjust                         │
│                                                 │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## 🔬 Research Validation

### ✅ Hypothesis Testing Results

#### Hypothesis 1: Behavioral Biases Impact Investment Decisions

```
H₀: No significant relationship exists
H₁: Significant positive relationship exists

Result: ✅ H₀ REJECTED
Conclusion: Behavioral biases DO significantly impact decisions
```

#### Hypothesis 2: Financial Literacy Influences Investment Decisions

```
H₀: Financial literacy has no significant influence
H₁: Financial literacy has significant favorable influence

Result: ✅ H₀ REJECTED
Conclusion: Financial literacy DOES significantly influence decisions
```

## 📊 Key Statistics at a Glance

<div align="center">

| Metric | Value | Insight |
|--------|-------|---------|
| 📝 Sample Size | 92 respondents | Representative young investor base |
| 🎯 Risk Seekers | 66.3% | Majority prefer higher returns |
| 📚 Personal Researchers | 75% | High self-reliance in decisions |
| 💔 Loss Aversion | 63% | Majority emotionally impacted by losses |
| 🏢 Familiarity Bias | 72.8% | High preference for known brands |
| 📈 Long-term Focus | 60% | Patient investment approach |
| 🎓 High Financial Literacy | 70%+ | Good awareness of financial terms |

</div>

---

## ⚠️ Research Limitations

<table>
<tr>
<td width="50%">

### 🌍 Scope Limitations
- Geographic concentration (Mumbai/Thane)
- Small sample size (92 respondents)
- Cross-sectional study design
- Limited to individual investors

</td>
<td width="50%">

### 📊 Methodological Considerations
- Self-reported data
- Potential response bias
- Limited age diversity
- Student-heavy sample

</td>
</tr>
</table>

---

## 🤝 Contributing

This research opens doors for further exploration. If you're interested in:
- 🔬 Extending this research
- 📊 Collaborating on related studies
- 💡 Sharing insights from your own work
- 🎓 Using this as foundation for advanced research

Feel free to reach out or build upon these findings!

---

## 📜 Citation

If you use this research, please cite as:
```
Dedhia, S. (2023). Effect of Behavioural Biases on Investor's Decision Making: 
A Study of Indian Companies. Bachelor's Thesis, Mithibai College of Arts, 
Mumbai, India.
```

<div align="center">

### ⭐ Found this research helpful? Share it with others interested in behavioral finance!

**Keywords:** `Behavioral Finance` `Investment Psychology` `Financial Literacy` `Indian Securities Market` `Investor Behavior` `Cognitive Biases` `Decision Making`

---

*Last Updated: 2023 | Academic Year 2022-2023*

</div>
